docs(in-depth): add dead code elimination page (#8007)
rolldown-rs/rolldown: docs/in-depth/dead-code-elimination.md

The `@__PURE__` annotation tells the bundler that a function call has no side effects. If the result is unused, the entire call can be removed.

```js
const button = /* @__PURE__ */ createButton();
```

If `button` is never used, Rolldown removes the `createButton()` call entirely. Without the annotation, Rolldown would keep the call because it can't be certain `createButton()` has no side effects.

::: tip
The annotation can also be written as `/* #__PURE__ */` (with `#` instead of `@`) for compatibility with other tools.
:::

### `@__NO_SIDE_EFFECTS__`

The `@__NO_SIDE_EFFECTS__` annotation tells the bundler that any call of this function declaration has no side effects.

```js
/* @__NO_SIDE_EFFECTS__ */
function createComponent(name) {
  return {
    name,
    render() {
      return `<${name}></${name}>`;
    },
  };
}

// This call will be removed if `button` is unused
const button = createComponent('button');
// This call will also be removed if `input` is unused
const input = createComponent('input');
```

This can be more convenient than adding `@__PURE__` to every call site when you know the function itself is always pure.

## Marking Entire Modules as Side-Effect-Free

> While you can mark individual expressions or functions, you can also mark entire modules as side-effect-free. If you mark a module as side-effect-free, Rolldown will not include that module entirely if none of its exports are used.

Author: ```suggestion
While you can mark individual expressions or functions, you can also mark entire modules as side-effect-free. If you mark a module as side-effect-free, Rolldown will treat every statement in that module as side-effect-free when none of its exports defined in that file directly are used.
```
?

```js
/* @__NO_SIDE_EFFECTS__ */
function createComponent(name) {
  return {
    name,
    render() {
      return `<${name}></${name}>`;
    },
  };
}

// This call will be removed if `button` is unused
const button = createComponent('button');
// This call will also be removed if `input` is unused
const input = createComponent('input');
```

This can be more convenient than adding `@__PURE__` to every call site when you know the function itself is always pure.

## Marking Entire Modules as Side-Effect-Free

While you can mark individual expressions or functions, you can also mark entire modules as side-effect-free. If you mark a module as side-effect-free, Rolldown will treat every statement in that module as side-effect-free when none of its exports are used.

::: details What does "none of its exports are used" mean?

This refers to the exports that are **defined in the module itself**, not re-exports from other modules.

```js [utils.js]
// assume that this file is marked as side-effect-free
window.loaded = true; // side effect

// Defined in this file - counts as "its exports"
export function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

// Re-exported from another file - does NOT count

> export { multiply } from './math.js';

Reviewer: Probably we should list all possible reexport case?
```js
export * from './mod'

import {a} from './mod'
export {a}

```

:::

For example, consider this case:

```js
// math.js
window.myGlobal = 'hello'; // side effect: modifies global

export function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

// main.js
import './math.js';
console.log('main');
```

If `math.js` is marked as side-effect-free, the output will be:

```js
console.log('main');
```

:::: warning This is conditional

The statements are only treated as side-effect-free when none of the module's exports are used. If any export is used, side effects are preserved.

::: details Example

For example, consider this case:

```js
// math.js (marked as side-effect-free)
window.myGlobal = 'hello'; // side effect: modifies global

export function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

// main.js
import { add } from './math.js';
console.log('main', add(2, 3));
```

The output will be:

```js
window.myGlobal = 'hello';

function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

console.log('main', add(2, 3));
```

On the other hand, if you mark every statement in `math.js` as side-effect-free, the output will be:

```js
function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

> console.log('main', add(2, 3));

Reviewer: ```
//#region math.js
window.myGlobal = "hello";
function add(a, b) {
	return a + b;
}

//#endregion
//#region index.js
console.log("main", add(2, 3));

//#endregion
```

Even if you mark `math.js` as sideEffects free, the output should not change.

Reviewer: I think this is a more proper example: 
https://repl.rolldown.rs/#eNptkMtqwzAQRX9l0EYxNTa0O5tCN6U/oY1sjxy1egRJblKM/70jPwiBLAS6I82Zw8xMsWZm2g14q75jvjvW3HPJeorC1TVYqR2VhNP24kOCGeQwwAIqeAu8qq1MZ3rnrXC9d9EbrIwfTzz38TJ/Pr2W8FYULVGRNSlMuJRsbzsmH3EbfCURf63s35fxnTTwDvyMxnjeAhlFPSCgUtinBqwftNIYYVy/iiDccfD2VNjoLvsykrjI/keOSNGTxGbyUNt05kwDECxP/lwHR8EaUNJEzG9Lhm3cA7OnDbCbqMn1SXu3LkWW0BWwowOmKVAdXqBrdyIhf6l31Okj75It//Yxjls=

Author: This is explaining when you mark all statements as side-effect-free, not marking `math.js` as side-effect-free.

When all statements are marked as side-effect-free, it is like
```js
/* #__PURE__ */ (() => {
  window.myGlobal = 'hello'; // side effect: modifies global
})();

export function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

// main.js
import { add } from './math.js';
console.log('main', add(2, 3));
```
this would generate
```js
function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

console.log('main', add(2, 3));
```

Reviewer: Ah, now I see the difference, make sense to me.

::: warning CSS Files
If your library imports CSS files, make sure to include them in the `sideEffects` array. Otherwise, the CSS imports may be removed:

```json [package.json]
{
  "name": "my-component-library",
  "sideEffects": ["**/*.css", "**/*.scss"]
}
```

:::

#### Plugin Hook: `moduleSideEffects`

Plugins can return [`moduleSideEffects`](/reference/Interface.SourceDescription#modulesideeffects) from the `resolveId`, `load`, or `transform` hooks to override side effect detection for specific modules:

```js [rolldown.config.js]
export default {
  plugins: [
    {
      name: 'my-plugin',
      resolveId(source) {
        if (source === 'my-pure-module') {
          return {
            id: source,
            moduleSideEffects: false,
          };
        }
        return null;
      },
    },
  ],
};
```

The priority order for determining a module's side effects is:

1. `transform` hook's returned `moduleSideEffects`
2. `load` hook's returned `moduleSideEffects`
3. `resolveId` hook's returned `moduleSideEffects`
4. `sideEffects` field in `package.json`

> 5. [`treeshake.moduleSideEffects`](/reference/InputOptions.treeshake#modulesideeffects) option

Reviewer: The correct order is: (from high to low)
1. transform hook
2. load hook
3. resolveId
4. treeshake.moduleSideEffects
5. `sideEffects` in package.json

Just swap the positions of 4 and 5.

The rationale is:
The priority of user configuration should always be higher than that of the library developer. This is convenient when a user wants to patch `sideEffects` for some files. 

https://repl.rolldown.rs/#eNptUstugzAQ/JWVLzQqAqm9gSr1UvUDeiw9GFgTN8aObNOkQvx71xg3iRRLSPvy7MzgmQlWzUzqHs/FtwuxZtUlz1lHaaPLEkYuNZUaLcejsR5m4H0PCwhrRsiKcuR+T/2sbnRntDMKC2WGhyzcy/Iw/PCUw/NuVxMqssrbCZecbdfS5pTGxSciYk7F+PuuTMsVvEC2R6VMVgMxcrJHQCGw8xWMppdCooNhHW1so9OH57uElWwDX0Ykjrw78AEpNUQiMrmpRTpzQANoWNj8ti52DatAcOUw9JYAFnETzJZFgI2JmHTnpdGrKTyHdgcbtEU/WarDI7T1P6I1SpEPuiBjhRyu0O90bjb1KPikSHuEl/o4kVckPv3hLI8dbxHdnh+wSrMQLJ0Ufly0VvCZenAZC8ejI9z1DZQbYjxXTlW0ZFptiq0lhV8xWHPSS4J/SMEg/Wt4O2z5Awrb2+E=

## Example: Optimizing a Component Library

Consider a component library with this structure:

```
my-component-lib/
├── package.json
└── src/
     ├── index.js
     └── components/
         ├── Button.js
         ├── Button.css
         ├── Modal.js
         └── Modal.css
```

::: code-group

```js [src/index.js]
export { Button } from './components/Button.js';
export { Modal } from './components/Modal.js';
```

```js [src/components/Button.js]
import './Button.css';
export function Button(props) {
  /* ... */
}
```

:::

To ensure unused components can be removed, mark only the CSS files as having side effects:

```json [package.json]
{
  "name": "my-component-lib",
  "sideEffects": ["**/*.css"]
}
```

Now when a consumer imports only `Button`:

```js

> import { Button } from 'my-component-lib';

Reviewer: Probably add a console or construct the `Button` component. This avoids misleading the user into thinking that only importing components would also make the tree shaking 
ineffective rolldown.
